hello my name is Bob Pollack and I'm
with Penn State Cooperative Extension
and today we're at musters garden center
and we're going to be showing you the
tip of the week on how to plant a ball
and burlap tree and also a potted shrub
and we also have Christine here today
and she works here at musters garden
center and she will be assisting first
there are a number of sizes of different
trees usually the larger you get they
get into ball and burlap material and
that just means these have been growing
in the nursery and so they dig them out
of the soil in the nursery as opposed to
being grown for their from a seedling in
a pot so in order to dig them from the
field they usually do that with a
machine but then they need to hold the
soil in place and they usually use
burlap to do that so we have an example
of that here this dogwood is also has a
metal metal wire cage to help support
that system also and then it's also
attached with twine now one of the
things you need to do when you purchase
a tree like this is to make sure that
the burlap that's being used is real
burlap okay if it is a synthetic burlap
then that has to be removed but as long
as it's a real burlap then you can keep
that in place this tree also has
protection on here which is good to have
which will help keep rabbits and bowls
and other creatures from attacking the
bark especially on a newly planted tree
so when you get this home and it is
heavy so you need to account for that I
think we can pick it up here but
depending on your situation this may or
may not be the best thing for you so it
can be heavy especially when the ball is
saturated like it is now alright so to
plant this you would dig your hole you
usually want to dig the hole larger than
what the size of the ball is and
okay and then you'll set that down in
the ground and you do not want to plant
it any deeper than the top of the root
ball okay where it was the natural
surface of the plant because the plant
roots come out from here we do not want
to bury them you may need to just put a
light coating of soil over the top but
no more than that now once you get it in
the ground you can take the wire cage we
will cut this for you to show how you
would do that but you do need to remove
the twine so that we can loosen this up
we do not want to leave twine around the
trunk of the tree occasionally now this
is real twine which will decay after
time sometimes synthetic twine is used
and that has to be removed now you also
want to take the top of the cage once
that's loose you can peel that back and
if you have wire cutters you can cut the
top part of that cage if necessary just
to open that up a little bit more but
usually we can just leave that there and
over time that will rot you also need to
remove untie and pull back the the
burlap now I'm not going to cut this one
all up today but you can take the burlap
it needs to be wrapped you can either
cut it off right around the top or you
can peel it back but we don't want to
leave any of the burlap exposed because
it can dry out and when it dries out
it's very difficult to get it rewetting
again so it's best to have that bent
down so that it's covered with soil or
just cut off around the top so that's
some of the key things with that plant
if you purchase a potted plant it can be
a little different situation this one
comes out of the pot nicely you can see
the roots now what we want to check on a
plant like this is that there are no
circling roots and those are roots that
grow a
on the inside of the container if there
are roots like that then we want to cut
those ok it's ok to cut them because
otherwise those will continue to grow
around in circles and that can be the
reason a plant dies two three four years
later from those circling roots that
will girdle itself we want to fan these
are these are nice so that you can get
this down in the ground and fan it out
same thing do not plant it any deeper
than the top of the soil in that pot now
if it really has a lot of roots growing
along the bottom and this one's nice
because it doesn't have that but if
there are a number of roots on the
bottom then those need to be severed ok
we want to sever that so they don't
continue to circle and then plant that
so those are just some keys about
planning a ball and burlap tree versus a
potted shrub and we hope that's helpful
to you there are a number of different
fact sheets that that help sometimes the
tag on the product also gives an
explanation of how to plant that plant
and we also have fact sheets on how to
plant an ornamental plant properly so
that's all we have for that today here
at musters garden center in indiana